source/dev/coding_guide.rst, before:

:orphan:

Coding Standards
================
This guide presents some guidelines to write well designed code.

In short:

+ Use the **Single Responsibility Principle** to keep functions simple
    + Functions only have one responsibility and therefore one reason to change
    + Responsibilities can include getting data, processing data, outputting data
+ **Avoid mutable global state**, including mutable static properties and singletons
    + Functions that use global state are hard to debug because global state can be
      changed from anywhere in the codebase
    + Global constants are fine, though be wary as some languages do not enforce them
      as such
+ **Avoid Side effects**
    + modifying a non-local variable
    + modifying a static local variable
    + modifying a mutable argument passed by reference
    + performing I/O
    + calling other side-effect functions
+ Use **dependency injection** and **higher order functions** to isolate code from non-deterministic behavior:
    + Calls to the OS
    + Calls to random number generators
    + Solution: use dependency injection and higher order functions to isolate code
+ **Use pure functions** whenever possible - no side effects or non-deterministic behavior:
    + Given the same inputs, the function will always have the same output
+ **Impurity is inevitable** - we need to read files, databases, get user input, etc
    + But you can keep impure code as far away from your functions as possible
    + Break hard-coded dependencies so you can swap them out when testing

This material is a summary of the content of this `article`_. For more details, go read
it!

Developers often think that their struggles writing unit tests are caused by a lack of
some fundamental testing knowledge or secret unit testing techniques. Unit tests should
be quite easy; the real problems that complicate unit testing, and introduce expensive
complexity, are a result of poorly-designed, untestable code. Writing unit tests and
generating testable code is not just about making testing less troublesome, but about
making the code itself more robust, and easier to maintain.


What's a Unit Test?
-------------------
Unit test: a method that instantiates a small portion of our application and verifies
its behavior **independently from other parts**. It does not test how everything
interacts and works together.

A typical unit test does three things:

+ Sets up data
+ Calls the function you want to check using that data
+ Checks that the function return values match what you expect, or that the function
  throws the exception you expect when something goes wrong

Here's a super simple example:

.. code-block:: python

    def my_func(val):
        return val + 2

    def test_my_func():
        val = 5
        returned_val = my_func(val)
        expected_result = 7
        assert returned_val == expected_result

For more info on unit testing please check out our :doc:`testing_guide`.


What Makes Code Hard to Test?
-----------------------------
Problem: Non-deterministic Factors
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Imagine that we are writing a program for a smart home microcontroller, and one of the
requirements is to automatically turn on the light in the backyard if some motion is
detected there during the evening or at night. We have started from the bottom up by
implementing a method that returns a string representation of the approximate time of
day (“Night”, “Morning”, “Afternoon” or “Evening”).

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day():
        time = datetime.now()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

This method looks simple, but it is very difficult to write a proper state-based unit
test for it. ``datetime.now()`` is, essentially, a hidden input that we can't control.
Every time we run the test it might be a different time of day, thus subsequent calls to
this will produce different results.

Such non-deterministic behavior makes it impossible to test the internal logic of the
``get_time_of_day()`` function without actually changing the system date and time.

.. code-block:: python

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        try:
            # Setup: change system time to 6 AM
            ...

            # Arrange phase is empty: testing static method, nothing to initialize

            # Act
            time_of_day = get_time_of_day()

            # Assert
            assert time_of_day == "morning"

        finally:
            # Teardown: roll system time back
            ...

Problems with this test:

+ lots of work to write because of the non-trivial setup and teardown logic
+ unreliable since it may fail even if there are no bugs in the system under test, due
  to system permission issues, for example
+ not guaranteed to run fast
+ not actually a unit test. It would be something between a unit and integration test,
  because it pretends to test a simple edge case but requires an environment to be set
  up in a particular way.

All these testability problems are caused by the low-quality ``get_time_of_day()`` API.
In its current form, this method suffers from several issues:

+ It is **tightly coupled** to the concrete data source. It is not possible to reuse
  this method for processing date and time retrieved from other sources, or passed as an
  argument; the method works only with the date and time of the particular machine that
  executes the code. Tight coupling is the primary root of most testability problems.
+ It violates the `Single Responsibility Principle
  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle>`_ (SRP). The method
  has multiple responsibilities; it consumes the information and also processes it.
  Another indicator of SRP violation is when a single class or method has more than one
  reason to change. From this perspective, the ``get_time_of_day()`` method could be
  changed either because of internal logic adjustments, or because the date and time
  source should be changed.
+ It lies about the information required to get its job done. Developers must read every
  line of the actual source code to understand what hidden inputs are used and where
  they come from. **The method signature alone is not enough to understand the method’s
  behavior.**
+ It is hard to predict and maintain. The **behavior of a method that depends on a
  mutable global state cannot be predicted** by merely reading the source code; it is
  necessary to take into account its current value, along with the whole sequence of
  events that could have changed it earlier. In a real-world application, trying to
  unravel all that stuff becomes a real headache.


Option 1: Fixing the Code with Dependency Injection
***************************************************
Easy solution: pass the time in with an argument

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day(time):
        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

From the unit testing perspective, this is great; the method is now deterministic (i.e.,
its return value fully depends on the input), so state-based testing is as easy as
passing some DateTime value and checking the result.

.. code-block:: python

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        date_time = datetime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00)
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(date_time)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"


We have a new problem though. Now whoever calls `get_time_of_day()` needs to provide the
date and time -- essentially moving the problem up the chain. This can be fixed using
`Dependency Injection <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection>`_ and
`Inversion of Control <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_of_control>`_.

Dependency Injection: a technique whereby one object supplies the dependencies of
another object.

Inversion of Control: The key point of IoC is to separate decision-making code (when to
do something) from action code (what to do when something happens). This technique
increases flexibility, makes our code more modular, and reduces coupling between
components.

Here's a quick example:

.. code-block:: python

    class DateTimeGetter:
        def get_time():
            return datetime.now()

    def get_time_of_day(date_time_getter):
        time = time_getter.get_time()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

    class MockDateTimeGetter:
        def __init__(self, date_time):
            self.date_time = date_time

        def get_time():
            return self.date_time

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        time_getter = MockDateTimeGetter(datetime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00))
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(time_getter)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"

This is great because now production code and unit test code can have different ways to
get the time. In the production environment, some real-life implementation will be
injected (e.g., one that reads actual system time). In the unit test, however, we can
inject a “fake” implementation that returns a constant or predefined DateTime value
suitable for testing the particular scenario.


Option 2: Fixing the Code with Higher Order Functions
*****************************************************
An alternative approach to Dependency Injection is to use `Higher-Order Functions
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_function>`_. Higher-order functions can be
thought of as another way of implementing Inversion of Control.

**higher-order function**: a function that does at least one of the following:

+ takes one or more functions as arguments (i.e. procedural parameters)
+ returns a function as its result

It should be noted that in order to have first class functions, your programming
language needs to be able to pass functions as arguments. Almost every language
including Python and MATLAB can do this. Java, Lisp, and Ruby cannot.

Here's what the code looks like:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day(get_date_time_method):
        time = get_date_time_method()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        get_date_time_method = lambda: DateTime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00)
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(get_date_time_method)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"

As you can see, Higher Order Functions often let us achieve the same result with less
code, and more expressiveness, than Dependency Injection. It is no longer necessary to
implement a class that must have specific functions in order to supply
``get_time_of_day()`` with the required functionality; instead, we can just pass a
function definition.


Problem: Side Effects
+++++++++++++++++++++
A function with `Side Effects
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side_effect_(computer_science)>`_ triggers some state
changes in the system outside of itself. Some examples are:

+ modifying a non-local variable
+ modifying a static local variable
+ modifying a mutable argument passed by reference
+ performing I/O
+ calling other side-effect functions

The only way to verify that these state changes happened correctly is to test whether
the corresponding side effects actually happened or not, which could be painful. Side
effects, like non-deterministic code, lead to deceptive, hard to understand and
maintain, tightly coupled, non-reusable, and untestable code.

Methods that are both deterministic and side-effect-free are called `Pure Functions
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function>`_. We’ll rarely have a problem unit
testing a pure function; all we have to do is to pass some arguments and check the
result for correctness. What really makes code untestable is hard-coded, impure factors
that cannot be replaced, overridden, or abstracted away in some other way.

Impurity is toxic: if method ``foo()`` depends on non-deterministic or side-effecting
method ``bar()``, then ``foo()`` becomes non-deterministic or side-effecting as well.
Eventually, we may end up poisoning the entire codebase. Multiply all these problems by
the size of a complex real-life application, and we’ll find ourselves encumbered with a
hard to maintain codebase full of smells, anti-patterns, secret dependencies, and all
sorts of ugly and unpleasant things.

However, impurity is inevitable; any real-life application must, at some point, read and
manipulate state by interacting with the environment, databases, configuration files,
web services, or other external systems. So instead of aiming to eliminate impurity
altogether, it’s a good idea to limit these factors, avoid letting them poison your
codebase, and break hard-coded dependencies as much as possible, in order to be able to
analyze and unit test things independently.


Problem: Global Mutable State
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Static Properties and Fields
****************************
Mutable static properties and fields are global state! They can hide the information
required for a method to get its job done, introduce non-determinism, or promote
extensive usage of side effects. Functions that read or modify mutable global state are
inherently impure.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

    if (SmartHomeSettings.cost_saving_enabled is False):
        _SwimmingPoolController.heat_water()

What if the ``heat_water()`` method doesn’t get called when we are sure it should have
been? Since any part of the application might have changed the ``cost_saving_enabled``
value, we must find and analyze all the places modifying that value in order to find out
what’s wrong. Also, as we’ve already seen, it is not possible to set some static
properties for testing purposes; they are read-only, but still non-deterministic.

Note that global *constants* that never change do not cause non-determinism or
side-effects.

.. code-block:: python

    def circumference(radius):
        return 2 * math.pi * radius # Because math.pi is a global constant, this is still a pure function!


Singletons
**********
Essentially, the Singleton pattern is just another form of the global state. Singletons
promote obscure APIs that lie about real dependencies and introduce unnecessarily tight
coupling between components. They also violate the Single Responsibility Principle
because, in addition to their primary duties, they control their own initialization and
lifecycle.

Singletons can easily make unit tests order-dependent because they carry state around
for the lifetime of the whole application or unit test suite. Have a look at the
following example:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_user(user_id):
        if user_id in user_cache.instance:
            user = user_cache.instance[user_id]
        else:
            user = _UserService.load_user(user_id)
            user_cache.instance[user_id] = user

        return user

In the example above, if a test for the cache-hit scenario runs first, it will add a new
user to the cache, so a subsequent test of the cache-miss scenario may fail because it
assumes that the cache is empty. To overcome this, we’ll have to write additional
teardown code to clean the ``UserCache`` after each unit test run. Sounds like a lot of
work.


Problem Code
------------

.. code-block:: python

    def is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id):
        dog_location = GPS.get_location(dog_id) # GPS is a hard-coded dependency
        my_location = GPS.get_location(my_id)

        if distance(my_location, dog_location, "mi") < 0.2:
           return True
        else:
            return False

    def test_is_my_dog_nearby_returns_true_when_nearby():
        # First we have figure out how to to get GPS to return fake values
        # It might not even be possible!
        ....

        result = is_my_dog_nearby(my_id = 123, dog_id = 456)
        assert result == True


How to Fix
++++++++++
+ Pass in the location value from above
    + `is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, location)`
    + This is the easiest way but it mostly just passes the problem onto the calling
      function
+ Pass in either a class or a function that handles the non-pure bits -- `GPS`. This is
  called **Inversion of Control**
+ When you pass in a class it's called **Dependency Injection**:
    + ``is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, class_that_gets_current_location)``
+ When you pass in a function, the function that takes a function as an argument is a **Higher Order Function**:
    + ``is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location)``


Better Code that Uses a Higher Order Function
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. code-block:: python

    def is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location):
        # We are no longer tightly coupled with the non-deterministic GPS
        dog_location = method_to_get_current_location(dog_id)
        my_location = method_to_get_current_location(my_id)

        if distance(my_location, dog_location, "mi") < 0.2:
           return True
        else:
            return False

    def test_is_my_dog_nearby_returns_true_when_nearby():
        my_id = 123
        dog_id = 456

        # Now we can simulate GPS behavior with our own method. Much easier!
        method_to_get_current_location = lambda id: return coord(3,4) if id == dog_id else return coord(0,0)

        result = is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location)
        assert result == True


.. _article: https://www.toptal.com/qa/how-to-write-testable-code-and-why-it-matters

Commit message:

doc: add section on not reinventing the wheel

source/dev/coding_guide.rst, after:

:orphan:

Coding Standards
================
This guide presents some guidelines to write well designed code.

In short:

+ Avoid re-inventing the wheel
    + In most languages, the standard library plus mature third-party packages are already very powerful!
+ Use the **Single Responsibility Principle** to keep functions simple
    + Functions only have one responsibility and therefore one reason to change
    + Responsibilities can include getting data, processing data, outputting data
+ **Avoid mutable global state**, including mutable static properties and singletons
    + Functions that use global state are hard to debug because global state can be
      changed from anywhere in the codebase
    + Global constants are fine, though be wary as some languages do not enforce them
      as such
+ **Avoid Side effects**
    + modifying a non-local variable
    + modifying a static local variable
    + modifying a mutable argument passed by reference
    + performing I/O
    + calling other side-effect functions
+ Use **dependency injection** and **higher order functions** to isolate code from non-deterministic behavior:
    + Calls to the OS
    + Calls to random number generators
    + Solution: use dependency injection and higher order functions to isolate code
+ **Use pure functions** whenever possible - no side effects or non-deterministic behavior:
    + Given the same inputs, the function will always have the same output
+ **Impurity is inevitable** - we need to read files, databases, get user input, etc
    + But you can keep impure code as far away from your functions as possible
    + Break hard-coded dependencies so you can swap them out when testing

This material is mostly a summary of the content of this `article`_. For more details, go read it!

Developers often think that their struggles writing unit tests are caused by a lack of
some fundamental testing knowledge or secret unit testing techniques. Unit tests should
be quite easy; the real problems that complicate unit testing, and introduce expensive
complexity, are a result of poorly-designed, untestable code. Writing unit tests and
generating testable code is not just about making testing less troublesome, but about
making the code itself more robust, and easier to maintain.


Why is using existing code preferable?
--------------------------------------
The open-source ecosystem is a wonderful place, full of useful code that has already been developed.
In many cases, this code is the result of dozens of people's work over many years, and has already
gone through rigorous review to ensure that it is accurate, robust, efficient, and well-documented.
By taking advantage of existing code, developers can focus on improving the quality of the things
in their code that are more novel, and reviewers can focus their review on this new code, rather than
both sides having to focus on duplicative code.

For example, in Python:
+ If you want to operate on arrays or matrices of un-labelled data, you probably want to use NumPy (and/or SciPy).
+ If you want to operate on tables of labelled data, you probably want to use Pandas.
+ If you want to analyze a collection of nodes, connected by links, you probably want to use networkx.

It's not a requirement that you work with third-party libraries, but if what you are manually implementing overlaps
substantially with an existing mature library (and especially if this is a library that we already use within a project),
we may suggest that the code be re-written before being merged. If you are not familiar with this library, this is okay:
if you let us know that you are unfamiliar, we may be able to provide a code snippet or a git branch that
demonstrates this functionality.


What's a Unit Test?
-------------------
Unit test: a method that instantiates a small portion of our application and verifies
its behavior **independently from other parts**. It does not test how everything
interacts and works together.

A typical unit test does three things:

+ Sets up data
+ Calls the function you want to check using that data
+ Checks that the function return values match what you expect, or that the function
  throws the exception you expect when something goes wrong

Here's a super simple example:

.. code-block:: python

    def my_func(val):
        return val + 2

    def test_my_func():
        val = 5
        returned_val = my_func(val)
        expected_result = 7
        assert returned_val == expected_result

For more info on unit testing please check out our :doc:`testing_guide`.


What Makes Code Hard to Test?
-----------------------------
Problem: Non-deterministic Factors
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Imagine that we are writing a program for a smart home microcontroller, and one of the
requirements is to automatically turn on the light in the backyard if some motion is
detected there during the evening or at night. We have started from the bottom up by
implementing a method that returns a string representation of the approximate time of
day (“Night”, “Morning”, “Afternoon” or “Evening”).

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day():
        time = datetime.now()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

This method looks simple, but it is very difficult to write a proper state-based unit
test for it. ``datetime.now()`` is, essentially, a hidden input that we can't control.
Every time we run the test it might be a different time of day, thus subsequent calls to
this will produce different results.

Such non-deterministic behavior makes it impossible to test the internal logic of the
``get_time_of_day()`` function without actually changing the system date and time.

.. code-block:: python

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        try:
            # Setup: change system time to 6 AM
            ...

            # Arrange phase is empty: testing static method, nothing to initialize

            # Act
            time_of_day = get_time_of_day()

            # Assert
            assert time_of_day == "morning"

        finally:
            # Teardown: roll system time back
            ...

Problems with this test:

+ lots of work to write because of the non-trivial setup and teardown logic
+ unreliable since it may fail even if there are no bugs in the system under test, due
  to system permission issues, for example
+ not guaranteed to run fast
+ not actually a unit test. It would be something between a unit and integration test,
  because it pretends to test a simple edge case but requires an environment to be set
  up in a particular way.

All these testability problems are caused by the low-quality ``get_time_of_day()`` API.
In its current form, this method suffers from several issues:

+ It is **tightly coupled** to the concrete data source. It is not possible to reuse
  this method for processing date and time retrieved from other sources, or passed as an
  argument; the method works only with the date and time of the particular machine that
  executes the code. Tight coupling is the primary root of most testability problems.
+ It violates the `Single Responsibility Principle
  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle>`_ (SRP). The method
  has multiple responsibilities; it consumes the information and also processes it.
  Another indicator of SRP violation is when a single class or method has more than one
  reason to change. From this perspective, the ``get_time_of_day()`` method could be
  changed either because of internal logic adjustments, or because the date and time
  source should be changed.
+ It lies about the information required to get its job done. Developers must read every
  line of the actual source code to understand what hidden inputs are used and where
  they come from. **The method signature alone is not enough to understand the method’s
  behavior.**
+ It is hard to predict and maintain. The **behavior of a method that depends on a
  mutable global state cannot be predicted** by merely reading the source code; it is
  necessary to take into account its current value, along with the whole sequence of
  events that could have changed it earlier. In a real-world application, trying to
  unravel all that stuff becomes a real headache.


Option 1: Fixing the Code with Dependency Injection
***************************************************
Easy solution: pass the time in with an argument

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day(time):
        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

From the unit testing perspective, this is great; the method is now deterministic (i.e.,
its return value fully depends on the input), so state-based testing is as easy as
passing some DateTime value and checking the result.

.. code-block:: python

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        date_time = datetime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00)
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(date_time)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"


We have a new problem though. Now whoever calls `get_time_of_day()` needs to provide the
date and time -- essentially moving the problem up the chain. This can be fixed using
`Dependency Injection <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection>`_ and
`Inversion of Control <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_of_control>`_.

Dependency Injection: a technique whereby one object supplies the dependencies of
another object.

Inversion of Control: The key point of IoC is to separate decision-making code (when to
do something) from action code (what to do when something happens). This technique
increases flexibility, makes our code more modular, and reduces coupling between
components.

Here's a quick example:

.. code-block:: python

    class DateTimeGetter:
        def get_time():
            return datetime.now()

    def get_time_of_day(date_time_getter):
        time = time_getter.get_time()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

    class MockDateTimeGetter:
        def __init__(self, date_time):
            self.date_time = date_time

        def get_time():
            return self.date_time

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        time_getter = MockDateTimeGetter(datetime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00))
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(time_getter)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"

This is great because now production code and unit test code can have different ways to
get the time. In the production environment, some real-life implementation will be
injected (e.g., one that reads actual system time). In the unit test, however, we can
inject a “fake” implementation that returns a constant or predefined DateTime value
suitable for testing the particular scenario.


Option 2: Fixing the Code with Higher Order Functions
*****************************************************
An alternative approach to Dependency Injection is to use `Higher-Order Functions
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_function>`_. Higher-order functions can be
thought of as another way of implementing Inversion of Control.

**higher-order function**: a function that does at least one of the following:

+ takes one or more functions as arguments (i.e. procedural parameters)
+ returns a function as its result

It should be noted that in order to have first class functions, your programming
language needs to be able to pass functions as arguments. Almost every language
including Python and MATLAB can do this. Java, Lisp, and Ruby cannot.

Here's what the code looks like:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_time_of_day(get_date_time_method):
        time = get_date_time_method()

        if (time.hour >= 0 and time.hour < 6):
            return "Night"
        if (time.hour >= 6 and time.hour < 12):
            return "Morning"
        if (time.hour >= 12 and time.hour < 18):
            return "Afternoon"
        return "Evening"

    def test_get_time_of_day_at_6AM_returns_morning():
        get_date_time_method = lambda: DateTime(2015, 12, 31, 06, 00, 00)
        time_of_day = get_time_of_day(get_date_time_method)
        assert time_of_day == "morning"

As you can see, Higher Order Functions often let us achieve the same result with less
code, and more expressiveness, than Dependency Injection. It is no longer necessary to
implement a class that must have specific functions in order to supply
``get_time_of_day()`` with the required functionality; instead, we can just pass a
function definition.


Problem: Side Effects
+++++++++++++++++++++
A function with `Side Effects
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side_effect_(computer_science)>`_ triggers some state
changes in the system outside of itself. Some examples are:

+ modifying a non-local variable
+ modifying a static local variable
+ modifying a mutable argument passed by reference
+ performing I/O
+ calling other side-effect functions

The only way to verify that these state changes happened correctly is to test whether
the corresponding side effects actually happened or not, which could be painful. Side
effects, like non-deterministic code, lead to deceptive, hard to understand and
maintain, tightly coupled, non-reusable, and untestable code.

Methods that are both deterministic and side-effect-free are called `Pure Functions
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function>`_. We’ll rarely have a problem unit
testing a pure function; all we have to do is to pass some arguments and check the
result for correctness. What really makes code untestable is hard-coded, impure factors
that cannot be replaced, overridden, or abstracted away in some other way.

Impurity is toxic: if method ``foo()`` depends on non-deterministic or side-effecting
method ``bar()``, then ``foo()`` becomes non-deterministic or side-effecting as well.
Eventually, we may end up poisoning the entire codebase. Multiply all these problems by
the size of a complex real-life application, and we’ll find ourselves encumbered with a
hard to maintain codebase full of smells, anti-patterns, secret dependencies, and all
sorts of ugly and unpleasant things.

However, impurity is inevitable; any real-life application must, at some point, read and
manipulate state by interacting with the environment, databases, configuration files,
web services, or other external systems. So instead of aiming to eliminate impurity
altogether, it’s a good idea to limit these factors, avoid letting them poison your
codebase, and break hard-coded dependencies as much as possible, in order to be able to
analyze and unit test things independently.


Problem: Global Mutable State
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Static Properties and Fields
****************************
Mutable static properties and fields are global state! They can hide the information
required for a method to get its job done, introduce non-determinism, or promote
extensive usage of side effects. Functions that read or modify mutable global state are
inherently impure.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

    if (SmartHomeSettings.cost_saving_enabled is False):
        _SwimmingPoolController.heat_water()

What if the ``heat_water()`` method doesn’t get called when we are sure it should have
been? Since any part of the application might have changed the ``cost_saving_enabled``
value, we must find and analyze all the places modifying that value in order to find out
what’s wrong. Also, as we’ve already seen, it is not possible to set some static
properties for testing purposes; they are read-only, but still non-deterministic.

Note that global *constants* that never change do not cause non-determinism or
side-effects.

.. code-block:: python

    def circumference(radius):
        return 2 * math.pi * radius # Because math.pi is a global constant, this is still a pure function!


Singletons
**********
Essentially, the Singleton pattern is just another form of the global state. Singletons
promote obscure APIs that lie about real dependencies and introduce unnecessarily tight
coupling between components. They also violate the Single Responsibility Principle
because, in addition to their primary duties, they control their own initialization and
lifecycle.

Singletons can easily make unit tests order-dependent because they carry state around
for the lifetime of the whole application or unit test suite. Have a look at the
following example:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_user(user_id):
        if user_id in user_cache.instance:
            user = user_cache.instance[user_id]
        else:
            user = _UserService.load_user(user_id)
            user_cache.instance[user_id] = user

        return user

In the example above, if a test for the cache-hit scenario runs first, it will add a new
user to the cache, so a subsequent test of the cache-miss scenario may fail because it
assumes that the cache is empty. To overcome this, we’ll have to write additional
teardown code to clean the ``UserCache`` after each unit test run. Sounds like a lot of
work.


Problem Code
------------

.. code-block:: python

    def is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id):
        dog_location = GPS.get_location(dog_id) # GPS is a hard-coded dependency
        my_location = GPS.get_location(my_id)

        if distance(my_location, dog_location, "mi") < 0.2:
           return True
        else:
            return False

    def test_is_my_dog_nearby_returns_true_when_nearby():
        # First we have figure out how to to get GPS to return fake values
        # It might not even be possible!
        ....

        result = is_my_dog_nearby(my_id = 123, dog_id = 456)
        assert result == True


How to Fix
++++++++++
+ Pass in the location value from above
    + `is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, location)`
    + This is the easiest way but it mostly just passes the problem onto the calling
      function
+ Pass in either a class or a function that handles the non-pure bits -- `GPS`. This is
  called **Inversion of Control**
+ When you pass in a class it's called **Dependency Injection**:
    + ``is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, class_that_gets_current_location)``
+ When you pass in a function, the function that takes a function as an argument is a **Higher Order Function**:
    + ``is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location)``


Better Code that Uses a Higher Order Function
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. code-block:: python

    def is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location):
        # We are no longer tightly coupled with the non-deterministic GPS
        dog_location = method_to_get_current_location(dog_id)
        my_location = method_to_get_current_location(my_id)

        if distance(my_location, dog_location, "mi") < 0.2:
           return True
        else:
            return False

    def test_is_my_dog_nearby_returns_true_when_nearby():
        my_id = 123
        dog_id = 456

        # Now we can simulate GPS behavior with our own method. Much easier!
        method_to_get_current_location = lambda id: return coord(3,4) if id == dog_id else return coord(0,0)

        result = is_my_dog_nearby(my_id, dog_id, method_to_get_current_location)
        assert result == True


.. _article: https://www.toptal.com/qa/how-to-write-testable-code-and-why-it-matters
